---
id: 1500
title: Spanish Food Forest
date: 2015-03-01
description:
  Garden designed to be a self sufficent and abundant ecosystem in Spain
category:
  - DESIGN
  - GARDEN
image: /images/projects/1500/thumb_spanish-food-forest.png
---

In 2015 I created a Food Forest for a client in Spain. They wanted a low
maintenance, yet sustainable garden for their property so using system and
regenerative design, I designed and implemented a garden that would become a
full forest ecosystem.

Focusing on plant data and ecological system thinking, I reshape the ecosystem
of the garden to allow for a higher diversity of plants. Reforming the slope
allowed for more water retention that provided water for larger species who
would help shelter an understory of productive plants.

![Illustrated section of terraces](/images/projects/1500/spanish-food-forest-01.png)

Each phase of the project is designed to establish, implement and develop the
ecosystem of the garden towards an established forest. This is crucially
measured by the garden being able to sustain nutrient cycling and moisture
retention.

For the first few years the site development focused on retaining more water
during the rainy season through earth works and increased vegetation. As plants
grew larger, they provided needed shade for more tropical species that have a
quicker nutrient take up.

![Timeline of succession](/images/projects/1500/spanish-food-forest-02.png)

## Planting Visualization

One of the key principles behind Food Forest design is that you start with a lot
of Support Species that work hard to build soil, enrich nutrients, and provide
habitat for beneficial organisms. Productive Species are then inter- planted
with the Support as the site improves. As Support Species age, they are chopped
out (Chop n Drop), providing room for the established Productive Species as well
as adding further nutrients to the soil.

When planning a planting schedule across multiple phases it was important to
know when certain species would be nearing the end of their life and when
Productive Species will need some more room to grow. Coding this information
into data visualization was important for both planning as well as conveying to
the client the rhythm of the garden.

Using excel charts of data, this radial bar graph was coded in Javascript
(P5.js) to show planting and chopping schedules. The colours of the bars
represent the various sizes of plants with Tâ€™d ends to indicate when plants
needed to be cut out.

![Radial bar chart of planting schedule](/images/projects/1500/spanish-food-forest-03.png)

## Master Plant Palette

One of the most important parts of this project and a critical factor in its
success has been the organization of a plant database that can be quickly read,
filtered and customized for various design steps. This information needed to be
displayed not only as technical reference for myself but also part of the main
documentation for the client so that they could explore the data and understand
what was in their new garden.

Several other projects in the area have used the same Planting Palette or
expanded for different uses, so keeping the database up to date has been a vital
part of design process.

![Table of plants and functionality](/images/projects/1500/spanish-food-forest-04.png)

The project has continued to be updated and worked upon for over the last 10
years and has become a lush and abundant garden that is a haven for wildlife and
a source of food and enjoyment for the client.

![Table of plants and functionality](/images/projects/1500/spanish-food-forest-05.jpg)

## Progress

### 2015

![Site planning the garden](/images/projects/1500/spanish-food-forest-2015_1.png)

![Earth works](/images/projects/1500/spanish-food-forest-2015_2.png)

### 2016

![Planting the garden](/images/projects/1500/spanish-food-forest-2016.png)

### 2024

![Current level of growth](/images/projects/1500/spanish-food-forest-2024.png)
