---
id: 2001
title: Coming Soon Visualisation
date: 2020-02-10
description:
  Visualizing Tasty Vietnamese Food from Coming Soon. Using data to create a
  large printed visualization for a local restaurant.
category:
  - DESIGN
image: /images/projects/2001/thumb_coming-soon.webp
href: https://blog.interactivethings.com/visualizing-tasty-vietnamese-food-929e07a10d5c
team:
  [
    ["Annina Walker", "Designer"],
    ["Christian Siegrist", "Project Manager"],
    ["Natalia Kobylinska", "Photographer"],
    ["Lloyd Richards", "Intern"],
  ]
---

`Coming Soon` is a local Vietnamese restaurant, close to our office. Along with
wonderful food, they also provide a cultural hub for local artists. Part of the
restaurant is a large vintage poster board that offers a creative platform to
showcase local businesses. We were approached to exhibit our work in April 2020
and decided that this would be an excellent opportunity for an internal lab
project that could explore data about the restaurant through a large printed
visualization. Together with Annina and Christian, we were excited to kick off
the project and explore the story behind the data.

## Research & Design Iteration

Like most of our projects, we started with a thorough brainstorming session and
plenty of sticky notes and markers to quickly get our ideas and impressions down
for the team to see. We collected our thoughts and started organizing them into
bins so we could see the directions to explore. Researching brought up lots of
inspirational work as well as clarifying the data we would need to collect for
our ideas. We started our ideation with quick sketches that framed our ideas and
represented the data in a way that tells a story and provides insight or
understanding.

![Collection of quick idea sketches, exploring ingredients, nutrition, history,
origins, methodologies.](/images/projects/2001/coming-soon-sketch_1.webp)

Eliminating ideas that might be out of scope or in the wrong direction and
instead focus down on a few ideas that we see having the most potential. Diving
deep into the narrower selection, we explored what we needed to produce them
with data, as well as what kind of resources we needed to collect or allocate
for production.

![Detailed sketches with observations/methodology](/images/projects/2001/coming-soon-sketch_2.webp)

By the end of our design ideation, we had focused down on two ideas to explore.
The first was based on the concept of a decision tree, something that would help
customers to decide what dish to order or try something new. The second was a
more thorough breakdown of a single dish, overlaying graphical elements that
represent the data and focusing more on the visual representation, rather than
the tooling. Before we could make a decision, it was important to build these
examples using actual data and assets so we shifted our attention towards the
dishes themselves.

![Digital mockups; decision tree](/images/projects/2001/coming-soon-mockups_2.webp)
![Digital mockup; dish breakdown](/images/projects/2001/coming-soon-mockups_3.webp)

## Pop-Up Photoshoot

Both of the designs were in part inspired by the graphical styles from our
initial research. Specifically, the work by Ryan MacEachern on
`Food x Design`[^1] and Yum Tang on `SHUSHI`[^2] has great visual appeal and fit
nicely with the vibrance and complexity of the dishes. We partnered with a local
video/photographer, Natalia Kobylinksa, and set up a photoshoot of the dishes.
Together with Coming Soon, we built a pop-up photo studio inside the restaurant
and, during their dinner rush, seamlessly photographed every dish on the menu as
they were being ordered.

![Pop up photo studio set up in the restaurant](/images/projects/2001/coming-soon-photoshoot_1.webp)

Our next step was to clean and colour correct the images so we could use them in
our designs. Thanks to some very clever machine learning tools from
`Kaleido AI`[^3], we were able to remove a lot of the backgrounds fairly
effortlessly and then use them in photoshop to create perfect images for our
ideas.

![Example of photography assets (Xa Lach Tron)](/images/projects/2001/coming-soon-photoshoot_2.webp)

Exploring the Data While we collected photo assets, we organized the information
provided by Coming Soon as well as added additional data through researched or
scrapping. For the decision tree idea, this involved creating nested datasets of
the menu categories, items, and their components. We first built tabular
datasets using excel and then imported into D3.js which could be used to
restructure the data and visualize it as a force tree diagram. From here we
could organize the data in different categorizations to look at how the decision
tree could be graphically represented on the board.

The second idea, breaking down an individual dish, required much more
information about the dish themselves and so we gathered information of their
sales and popularity for the last year as well as a breakdown of their
ingredients. By combining the information collected with the USDA's FoodData
Central[^4] we could build detailed nutritional tables for each dish in Tableau.
Tableau also allowed us to visualize layers of the information to see trends or
patterns and create quick graphs to test with our concept.

## Layering the Data

With the data and the pictures in front of us, we were able to identify problems
and potential focus from our initial ideas. We realized that while the force
tree diagrams for the decision tree were interesting looking and fun to explore
on a computer when it came to a large print we quickly lost the essential beauty
of the photographs when so many were on the board at once. We could see that the
individual breakdown offered much more interesting insight into the dishes and
invoked the most intrigue for further exploration. From here we could start to
design the final layout, working with proportions and typology to best represent
and highlight the data.

![Digital mockup; with data](/images/projects/2001/coming-soon-mockups_1.webp)

Working first with Tableau and Illustrator we created many different graphical
styles for the data, representing different relationships or focusing on
different topics. Similar to our initial design process, we quickly saw what
ideas work and which created confusion. We focused on representing the
nutritional information of each dish/ingredient in a way that allowed you to
compare them easily as well as highlight interesting nutritional facts. We
created a stacked radial graph for the nutrition of each ingredient that
proportionally sized itself around the dish based on its weight like a pie
chart, to create a stacked radial pie chart. Building this in D3.js allowed us
to quickly experiment and format the atypical graph structure and refine its
proportions and layout with feedback from the design.

![Wireframes combined with visualization mockups and scaled assets](/images/projects/2001/coming-soon-mockups_4.webp)

## Graphical Production

From our D3.js code, we extracted SVG files that imported directly into
Photoshop to be combined with our cleaned photos and layout. With a bit of back
and forth, we were able to quickly test ideas and produce polished designs for
review. With the posters being so large, we came up with a hybrid method of
testing the ideas on a projector to get a feel for the proportions of the design
as a whole while at the same time test printing smaller components to ensure
adequate readability and accessibility. With our final design reviewed, refined,
and approved we were ready to start printing. Working with a local print shop we
tested colours and quality and make any final adjustments before sending the
final proof to print.

We hope you have enjoyed reading about our process in producing this project.
With the pandemic going on, we hope to have the first edition up in May 2020.
Coming Soon will be reopening their doors May 11th and will be displaying a
slightly smaller version in their store window until times when they can return
to normal business.

![Radial stacked bar for Bun Bo Xao](/images/projects/2001/coming-soon-01.png)
![Radial stacked bar for Pho Bo](/images/projects/2001/coming-soon-02.png)
![Radial stacked bar for Cari Viet Nam](/images/projects/2001/coming-soon-03.png)

---

[^1]:
    Maceachern, Ryan. “Design x Food.” Issuu. Accessed January 29, 2020.
    https://issuu.com/ryanmaceachern/docs/designxfood.

[^2]:
    Tang, Yum. “‘SHUSHI.’” Edited by WildAid. Behance. Accessed January
    22, 2020. https://www.behance.net/gallery/72884621/SHUSHI.

[^3]:
    Kaleido. “Remove Background from Image.” remove.bg. Accessed February
    24, 2020. https://www.remove.bg/.

[^4]:
    “FoodData Central.” FoodData Central. Accessed February 25, 2020.
    https://fdc.nal.usda.gov/.
