export const metadata = {
  id: "024",
  title: "Applying D3 Force in React",
  date: "2023-05-25",
  description: "Getting a feel for how to apply D3 force in React",
  tags: ["d3", "physics"],
  isFeatured: true,
};

import {
  BubblePacking,
  BubblePacking2,
  MockBubbles,
} from "../023-mdx-contentlayer/024";

For a new visualization I'm working on, I wanted to use D3's force layout to
position nodes. I've used D3 force before, but never in React. I was curious how
to apply the force to the DOM nodes in React, in a way that would be performant
and not cause React to re-render the nodes on every tick.

I got some solid advice for [Bia](https://www.biamalveiro.com/) who had worked
on a similar problem before. In her
[Lego Chart](https://github.com/biamalveiro/charts-with-legos) project, she uses
a useState hook to rerender the nodes when the force layout ticks. This is a
great solution, resulted in the following:

<BubblePacking data={MockBubbles} />

The interesting this solution is that the `setRenderRounter` is used to trigger
the render of the component on every tick. This is a bit of a hack, but it
works. The downside is that it causes the component to re-render on every tick,
which is not ideal.

```typescript
useEffect(() => {
  const nodes = data.map((d) => ({ ...d, color: randomColor() }));
  setItems(nodes);

  simulation
    .force("forceX", forceX(width / 2))
    .force("forceY", forceY(height / 2))
    .force("charge", forceManyBody())
    .force(
      "collide",
      forceCollide<Node>()
        .strength(0.1)
        .radius((d) => d.count + 10),
    )
    .on("tick", updateSimulation)
    .on("end", endSimulation)
    .nodes(nodes)
    .alpha(0.5)
    .restart();
}, [data]);
```

The useEffect triggers the initial simulation and applies the correct forces
based on the data. The important part is that the `nodes` are creates and set to
the items before being passed to the `.nodes()` method of the simulation. This
is what allows the simulation to update the items with new x and y coordinates
without rerendering the component. Then with the `.alpha()` method, the
simulation is stopped once the elements settle to save performance.

Finally, the component returns a `div` that contains an SVG element. The SVG
element contains a `circle` element for each Node object in the 'items' array.
The `cx`, `cy`, and `r` attributes of each `circle` element are set to the `x`,
`y`, and `count` properties of the corresponding Node object, respectively.

### Alternative

<BubblePacking2 data={MockBubbles} />

This second approach is a little cleaner with the nodes from the simulation
being updated a layout property which can be mapped over. I've noticed that this
resulted in a little more type issues as I needed to extend the
SimulationNodeDatum with the Node type of the data point.  
This is a little more complex, but I think it's a little cleaner.

```typescript
useEffect(() => {
  const simulation = forceSimulation()
    .alphaMin(0.1)
    .force("forceX", forceX(width / 2))
    .force("forceY", forceY(height / 2))
    .force("charge", forceManyBody())
    .force(
      "collide",
      forceCollide<Node>()
        .strength(0.5)
        .radius((d) => d.count + 10),
    );

  simulation.on("tick", () => {
    simulation.tick(1);
    setLayout([...simulation.nodes()]);
  });
  simulation.nodes([...data.map((d) => ({ ...d, color: randomColor() }))]);

  simulation.alpha(0.5).restart();

  return () => {
    simulation.stop();
  };
}, [data]);
```

In the useEffect there is now only a scoped instance of the simulation and
callback functions for the tick are applied on initial load here. There is also
a cleanup function for when the component unmounts.
